---
title: "Waves Don't Die"
slug: "waves-dont-die"
issue: "Summer"
issue_full_name: "Summer 2020"
year: "2020"
date: "2020-06-01"
authors: ['Emily Shen']
section: "features"
audio: []
main_image: ""
banner_image: ""
images: []
videos: []

---

One Friday evening at the end of this past February, my then-boyfriend told me he was taking me to see *Portrait of a Lady on Fire*. We didn't end up going; the movies were a cover for a surprise birthday party on the eve of my 21st. We never went. Two and a half weeks later, the virus would begin to make its slow descent across cities nationwide, and we learned we'd have to leave campus in five days. We held each other and wept in the spare dorm room I hadn't had time to decorate yet: I'd only just gotten back to school in mid-January after a gap semester. Then, we had lazily sat near the baggage claim of Boston Logan International Airport for longer than we should have, as if to assert dominance over the passage of time, savoring the fact that unlike during our eight months of long-distance, every moment now no longer felt so terribly urgent: punctuated by the dreadful realization that we'd soon have to say goodbye. We had gotten so good at counting and now we were doing it again. The first thing I'd done when I'd learned the news was to count the new number of months we'd have to spend apart; he had done the same. "Another seven months of long-distance," he said. He was trying to break up with me. We agreed to stay together through the end of the week. 

Since watching *Portrait of a Lady on Fire* had been relegated to a list of things we planned on doing together, eventually, I couldn't stop thinking about how much I wanted to watch it during this last week together. We had never bothered keeping organized track of the things we expected to do, so confident were we that we'd do them eventually, and so every time that week I thought of something that was newly inaccessible to us ("are you sure about the beach," said Eva, "it may not be wise to take public transportation"), I felt the kind of stinging loss that classmates on the cusp of Latin honors must have felt once the University announced all grades would be transitioned to Emergency SAT/UNSAT, the kind of loss you feel entitled to even if you didn't, strictly speaking, lose anything: so confident are you that something would have worked out in your favor even though it hadn't yet technically been solidified.

Soon after we scattered back to our respective homes, the film began streaming on Hulu. *Portrait of a Lady on Fire* was enthusiastically touted as the "perfect quarantine watch" by a news source I will not publicly admit to consuming. Under orders to shelter in place, I watched it alone.

***

In *Portrait of a Lady on Fire* (dir. Céline Sciamma), Marianne (Noémie Merlant), an artist, is charged with painting the rebellious, aristocratic Héloïse (Adèle Haenel) for a portrait to be sent to a Milanese nobleman, her future husband. Marianne is asked to succeed where a previous artist had failed (presumably as a result of Héloïse's refusal to pose. Later, Marianne burns the previous artist's groseque, faceless painting: portrait of a lady, on fire). To mitigate the risk of making the same mistake, Marianne is instructed by Héloïse's mother (Valeria Golino) to pose herself: as Héloïse's walking companion during the day, observing her features to paint her from memory at night.

During her first attempt, Marianne uncertainly sketches an outline of Héloïse's face in charcoal. Hands trembling, she fiddles with the stick of charcoal, shakily adding a line here, then just as soon rubbing away another. When the camera moves to a shot of Marianne's face, she is visibly distressed, looking away from the canvas as if in disgust. Marianne mistakenly believes the problem with her painting is that masquerading as Héloïse's walking companion means she lacks the necessary time and daylight to paint, and suggests to Héloïse's mother that Héloïse go out alone the next day so that she has time to paint. "Your mother will let you go out alone tomorrow," says Marianne, as Héloïse attempts to take a puff from Marianne's tobacco pipe. "You'll be free." Héloïse swallows, looks down. "Being free is being alone?"

"You don't think so?" asks Marianne. "I'll tell you tomorrow," says Héloïse. The next day, Héloïse says, "In solitude, I found the liberty you spoke of. But I also felt your absence."

Héloïse's earnest confession is perhaps what triggers Marianne's guilt at deceiving her, so on the next day's excursion, she reveals to Héloïse the true reason for her presence, showing Héloïse the portrait. In one of the more tragicomic scenes of the film, Marianne looks on anxiously as Héloïse examines the painting. "You're saying nothing?" she asks Héloïse tensely. 

"Is that me?"

"Yes," says Marianne defensively. 

"Is that how you see me?"

"It's not only me," says Marianne. 

"What do you mean, not only you?"

"There are rules, conventions, ideas." 

"You mean there's no life? No presence?"

"Your presence is made up of fleeting moments that may lack truth," says Marianne. 

Haenel's facial deftness stands in contrast to the lifeless representation of Héloïse on canvas. Haenel is critical, with her eyebrow arched. She is frustrated, with her nostrils flared and lips pursed. She is insolent, with her eyes narrowed. As if to further illuminate the distance between the woman and her representation, our viewpoint shifts from Héloïse's reaction back to a still close-up of the painting. Marianne angrily wipes out the painted face with a rag, as if striking Héloïse herself in retaliation for her comments. Unfortunately, the painting is so unlike Héloïse that one can imagine Marianne does not feel appropriately sated by her childish outburst. The first painting has nothing of Héloïse in it, only Marianne's technical prowess; the "rules, conventions, ideas" or portraiture. 

But after Héloïse consents to have her portrait painted, the act of looking at Héloïse openly allows Marianne to notice her traits in much more granular detail. "When you're embarrassed, you bite your lips. And when you're annoyed, you don't blink," observes Marianne.

"You know it all," says Héloïse, amused. 

"Forgive me, I'd hate to be in your place," says Marianne.

"We're in the same place. Exactly the same place. Come here. Look. If you look at me, who do I look at?" asks Héloïse knowingly. Héloïse rattles off her own list of acute observations, as if *she* were the one making *Marianne* instead of the other way around: "When you don't know what to say, you touch your forehead. When you lose control, you raise your eyebrows. And when you're troubled, you breathe through your mouth." 

Here, Sciamma's admiration of Virginia Woolf (whom she once described in an interview as "the greatest novelist") is clear: ideas in this art-making scene echo ones articulated by Woolf in her experimental novel *The Waves*, which follows a group of children through adulthood as they grapple with questions of love and loss. One of these characters, Bernard, a writer after Woolf's own heart, is interested in the porous bounds of individual identity, the ways we make and unmake each other through artwork and through love — "Let me then create you. (You have done as much for me.)" Woolf intertwines these six different interior monologues into the composition of a sort of central consciousness. 

As if to affirm Héloïse, the camera then pans to show Marianne from her perspective after she walks back to her easel. True to form, an agitated Marianne breathes through her mouth, having been involuntarily submitted, as one might say, to the mortifying ordeal of being known. As Bernard says (a great deal more dramatically) after his friend Neville informs him that he is no Byron: "Friendship, how piercing are your darts .... like a long wave, like a roll of heavy waters, he went over me, his devastating presence  —  dragging me open, laying bare the pebbles on the shore of my soul." 

Within these two attempts lie two radically different approaches to artmaking: the first attempt is the artist as voyeur; the second is the willing muse as co-creator. The first attempt, the technically perfect portrait painted in secret, from a distance, and without Heloise's consent, produces an objectified, lifeless visual representation of its subject; the second attempt is infinitely more successful. 

It seems relevant to note the real-life parallels between the two portraits and the two phases of Haenel's career as an actress: pre-and-post Sciamma (though certain people might say it's narrow-minded to cling too stubbornly to the biographical register of interpretation). In 2002, Haenel debuted in a film directed by Christophe Ruggia, who was officially charged with sexually harassing the then-12-year-old Haenel in 2020. It was not until she was cast by Sciamma five years later in *Water Lilies* that Haenel would return to acting. With its implication of artwork's futility in the absence of the muse's autonomy, *Portrait of a Lady on Fire* subtly indicts Ruggia, whose artistic creation also occurred at Haenel's unwanted expense, and in a manner even more grave.

***

In the ancient legend of Orpheus and Eurydice, the two begin happily wedded. But Eurydice soon dies a sudden and premature death. Orpheus, a son of Apollo's, is a poet and musician; his was the most beautiful voice in the world, and so he bargains for Eurydice's return from the underworld by playing the lyre so desperately that Hades is allegedly moved to tears. Eurydice is allowed to return to the world of the living on one condition: that on the journey back, Orpheus does not look back at her. But on the cusp of returning back to Earth, Orpheus looks, losing Eurydice again, this time permanently.   

Interpretations of the Orphic myth abound. French writer Maurice Blanchot, in *The Gaze of Orpheus*, absolves Orpheus of annihilating Eurydice, claiming that as an artist, Orpheus had nothing short of a duty to steal a glance at her, that mysterious "limit of what art can attain"  —  the proverbial forbidden fruit. In fact, Orpheus would never have been mythologized if he did not look back at Eurydice; the backwards glance is what made him the artist he was: "He is only Orpheus in his song, he could have no relationship with Eurydice except within the hymn, he has life and actuality only after the poem and through the poem, and Eurydice represents nothing more than that magical dependence which makes him into a shade when he is not singing and only allows him to be free, alive, and powerful within the space of the Orphic measure." Blanchot's casual dismissal of Eurydice as "nothing more than that magical dependence which makes [Orpheus] into a shade when he is not singing" views the woman as little more than an obstacle to the artistic potential of her male partner: someone to be summarily eliminated when elimination is convenient. 

Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Zizek looks at the Orphic myth through the lenses of two operatic interpretations: Monteverdi's *Orfeo* and Gluck's *Orfeo ed Euridice*. Monteverdi's *Orfeo* gestures towards what might be considered a Lacanian interpretation of the myth: "Orpheus is quick to accept the narcissistic profit of this reversal: he becomes enraptured with the poetic glorification of Euridice that lies ahead of him  —  to put it succinctly, he no longer loves HER, what he loves is the vision of HIMSELF displaying his love for her." In a variation of Blanchot's interpretation, Orpheus loses Eurydice intentionally for the sake of his artwork, to "regain her as the object of sublime poetic inspiration." In Gluck's opera, however, Orpheus announces his intention to kill himself by singing the aria "Che faro senza Euridice" ("What shall I do without Euridice?") when he loses Eurydice, and, moved by his commitment, Cupid intervenes, returning her to him. 

Zizek observes that Gluck and Hector Berlioz, in his reworking of Gluck's opera, both wrote versions where Orpheus was sung by female vocal ranges. "In the high era of the bourgeois ideology, the gesture of offering oneself to self-sacrifice performed by Orpheus at the opera's highpoint can be conceived only as feminine  —  it is no longer compatible with the dignity of a man to perform it," concludes Zizek, who proposes a more radical option: staging Orpheus and Eurydice as an explicitly lesbian couple. "What if this is the ultimate reason why their love is doomed to fail?" wonders Zizek.

In *Portrait of a Lady on Fire*, Sophie (Luàna Bajrami), the housemaid, expresses outrage at the conclusion of the Orphic tale. Marianne explains, "He chooses the memory of her. That's why he turns. He doesn't make the lover's choice, but the poet's." Héloïse counters, "Perhaps she was the one who said *Turn around*." While the dominant interpretation of this glance could be coded as the annihilating power of the male gaze, Héloïse reinterprets the meaning of the look: perhaps Eurydice did not consent to returning, and asked Orpheus to let her go. Support for Héloïse's interpretation can be found in the line of the myth she reads in which Eurydice does not resist her fate: "Dying a second time, she did not complain. His sole fault was loving her." 

The idea of the liberated Eurydice is reinforced in the scene that immediately follows after the telling of the Orphic myth. The three women go to a bonfire gathering at night, a celebration of sorority in which women sing and dance. At the bonfire, Héloïse's dress briefly catches on fire. Héloïse adopts Orpheus's backwards glance, yet, she is simultaneously the forbidden Eurydice described by Blanchot, that "profoundly dark point towards which art, desire, death, and the night all seem to lead." Héloïse seems to notice her dress for a second, but then she immediately lifts her eyes back towards Marianne, doing nothing: a flame that does not want to be snuffed out. Blanchot's Eurydice, powerful as she is, does not desire to return back to Earth. 

Yet a few scenes later, Marianne is not as magnanimous as her initial interpretation of the Orphic myth would suggest. As in another Greek myth  —  that of the sculptor Pygmalion and his statue Galatea  —  so too does the artist fall in love with her creation, and desire to possess it completely. "I'd like to destroy this [painting] too," she tells Héloïse passionately. "Through it, I give you to another." Bohemian Marianne, with her tobacco pipe and secure inheritance of father's portrait studio, has nothing to lose. Héloïse  —  who is also beholden to provide for her mother with her future husband's wealth  —  does. Héloïse responds, "It's terrible. Now you possess me a little, you bear me a grudge." Her eyes fill with tears, but her lips shake with rage. "Do not imagine me guilty," she says. 

Marianne chases Héloïse to the shore with an apology. The tide is high, and she finds Héloïse at the edge of the beach coolly watching some nearby boulders get pounded by the unending waves. "The waves fell; withdrew and fell again, like the thud of a great beast stamping," writes Woolf, whose own characters would also understand how closely the cyclical rhythm of the ocean resembles the waxing and waning of human emotion. In one of the most intense scenes of the film, the sound of the ocean cuts through the sound of Marianne weeping as she holds Héloïse and asks for forgiveness, her breath rising and falling nearly as loudly. In this version of the Orphic myth, giving up the loved one is the act of self-sacrifice, establishing Marianne as an Orpheus after Gluck rather than Blanchot.

Marianne and Héloïse return to the studio, where they put the finishing touches on the portrait. Before the fight Héloïse had acknowledged she liked the new painting far better than the first attempt. Objectively, this is true: at least this time when the still shot of the portrait is again contrasted with the shot of dynamic Haenel there is much less distance. The creation of the second painting is a collaboration between artist and muse, as both of their looks reflect each other. Though the painting is of Héloïse, part of Marianne is enclosed within it as well: Heloise's expression reflects the experience of looking at her loved one. 

There is, conveniently, no one else to corroborate this, but it has been said to me that mere hours after I first read a piece of writing my boyfriend had shared with me I sleepily confessed that I loved him. The longer we dated, the more I found myself involuntarily slipping into his own verbal postures, including the use of the word "posture." It was like Bernard had said  —  we melted into each other with phrases; we were edged with mist.

In an email from October, my boyfriend wrote, "I was just reading your piece, because I missed hearing your vocal cadences, and I can hear it so clearly when you write about intimacy. I noticed that in one late draft you describe the thing in your throat as 'wet and pink,' words that appear in a similar list in my piece, a list on which you commented. It was a relief to find that I had wound my way, if even only a little, into that story."

He borrowed from me, too, once joking with his friend until I pulled out my phone to show him the near-exact lines he had plagiarized from a comedy piece I had written a year before. "I can't believe you're trying to take credit for your girlfriend's jokes right in front of her," said his friend, shaking his head. "I didn't even realize I had done it," he said, ears turning pink. Ours was an imitation that reflected intimacy more than it did simple admiration: we'd reflexively reach for each others' words as if they were our own. We couldn't tell the difference once we'd grown to fit inside each others' phrases.

***

In Blanchot's interpretation of the Orphic myth, art — and the desire to create good art — can be annihilating, but in Sciamma's *Portrait of a Lady on Fire*, the creation of art is inextricably linked to the relationship of artist and muse as equals and co-creators. The second painting is infinitely more successful than the first because Héloïse consents to being seen.

*Portrait of a Lady on Fire* is interested in the conceptual distance between enclosure and emancipation: love, and freedom. The trappings of a romantic relationship are likened to the trappings of a picture frame: despite the promise of enclosure, neither is ultimately about possession at all costs. Sciamma believes there is an alternative, something more equitable than this kind of possession. As she puts in her own words, "Because the film is built around the fact that it's the memory of a love story, even in the loss I wanted a luminous path, and the fact that the feeling is alive and not tragic, it doesn't end. That love is emancipation, and the movie says it's something that can only grow, and it has a future." The idea is reminiscent of another French writer's  —  philosopher Alain Badiou once wrote a short treatise on contemporary love entitled In Praise of Love. "Every love states that it is eternal: it is assumed within the declaration ... the problem then resides in inscribing this eternity within time. Because, basically, that is what love is: a declaration of eternity to be fulfilled or unfurled as best it can be within time: eternity descending into time," wrote Badiou. "Happiness in love is the proof that time can accommodate eternity." If we believe love to be eternal, then not even freedom could mean the abandonment of its sacred enclosure. Rather, freedom could be defined here as instrumental to its preservation: freedom from experiencing love in anything other than its full, arresting power. In Sciamma's hands, the artwork inspired by this emancipation becomes that eternal vessel in which love's trace is preserved. There is no need to settle for the shadow of a lover trailing silently behind you. 

The consensual gaze that Sciamma advocates for extends as well to the spectator's gaze towards the film. *Portrait of a Lady on Fire* has often drawn comparisons to fellow French lesbian romance *Blue is the Warmest Colour*, which raised eyebrows for gratuitous sex scenes that seemed exploitative on the part of Abdellatif Kechiche, the male director. Intimate scenes in *Portrait of a Lady on Fire* are suggestive but not overtly explicit; Sciamma is happy to let certain events transpire offscreen. In dismantling the voyeuristic gaze, Sciamma preserves the relationship's intimacy, allowing the literal closeness between two people to be shielded from the audience. Recall the lifeless portrait; Marianne's sneaky glances as a proxy for the gaze of Héloïse's suitor. In *Portrait of a Lady on Fire*, Sciamma acknowledges the many forms of voyeurism's farcical intimacy: its inherent one-sidedness, the impossibility of truly seeing someone in the absence of their consent to be seen. 

Yet while Sciamma acknowledges the potential for representative art to be exploitative, she also gestures towards the reason why it can alternatively be suited to preserving intimacy: it rewards inside knowledge. It allows the people who know where to look (and what to look for) experience something that others cannot. Because at its core, intimacy is the acknowledgement that in order for people to experience closeness, others must necessarily experience distance. 

In the final scenes of the film, Sciamma shows us what this intimacy can look like. The final scenes reward the spectator's attention; to understand them requires the keen gaze of someone who cares (someone, who like Héloïse and Marianne, is able to recognize the biting of the lip, the breathing of the mouth). Viewing these scenes is a more intimate experience than the passive consumption of any sex scene: Sciamma hints that intimacy can't be given; it must be earned. In other words, she manages to establish intimacy between the viewer and the film by replicating its real conditions. But to understand Sciamma's lesson fully is also to recognize the limitations of intimacy between viewer and film. As mere spectators whose contract with the film only goes back the last two hours, we are not  —  cannot ever be  —  fully intimate with the conditions of its creation. Hidden within the film there must be additional secrets, unlike these ones, that we don't understand.

But we can try to guess; we know some things. We know that a few years after meeting Sciamma through *Water Lilies*, Haenel is in attendance at 2014 César Awards. We know that she wins an award, and that during the delivery of her acceptance speech, she is overcome with emotion. And that, at the end of her speech, after a long, flustered pause, she "above all" thanks "Celine ... because ... because I love her, voilà." We know that Haenel and Sciamma split amicably in 2018, and that soon after, they make a film about artwork and intimacy where one character once wonders to the other, "Do all lovers feel that they are inventing something?" And so we know that there must be traces of their own "invention" in their film that are invisible to us: secrets legible only to them. 

Because of its acknowledgment of the symbiotic relationship between artwork and love, and its eternal persistence, the conclusion of the film is ultimately as hopeful as it can afford to be: offering us proof through artwork of a love story quietly existing past its physical expiration date. In the final scenes, we see that a knowing reference is discreetly inscribed inside another portrait, and Héloïse is moved to tears as an orchestra plays the piece Marianne once played to her on the harpsichord. Is circularity not evidence enough of eternity? It is evidence of a conceptual shape composed of a series of curves stretching towards infinity: swooping past, then diverging, then swooping by again. Marianne finds solace in these moments, as if the part of her made by Héloïse has been set alight once more upon contact with memory, as if to say: *I love you for an eternity, I'm with you always*. 

Bernard, too, at the end of *The Waves*, recognizes the permanence of people blending together, the lasting impacts we make on each other beyond the facts of our physical proximity:

>And now I ask, 'Who am I?' I have been talking of Bernard, Neville, Jinny, Susan, Rhoda and Louis. Am I all of them? Am I one and distinct? I do not know. We sat here together. But now Percival is dead, and Rhoda is dead; we are divided; we are not here. Yet I cannot find any obstacle separating us. There is no division between me and them... 
Here on my brow is the blow I got when Percival fell. Here on the nape of my neck is the kiss Jinny gave Louis. My eyes fill with Susan's tears. I see far away, quivering like a gold thread, the pillar Rhoda saw, and feel the rush of the wind of her flight when she leapt.

My ex-boyfriend and I had gone to the beach once before. Before he took me there on our first date, he often went alone. His beach was fairly grimy and it occurred to me when we got there that the meaning of inviting me was not the sightworthiness of the location but rather the fact of being let in on a secret; couples are only as strong as the secrets they share. 

The tide was low and so were the planes that flew overhead on their way to Logan. We walked along the coastline until the sky darkened, reading each other poems. Held hands still slightly sticky from the sandwiches we had eaten for dinner, and on the ride home, though the train car was nearly empty, we only took up a single seat.